Preface
Welcome to the fourth edition of Mastering Go! As the Go programming language continues to evolve and gain popularity, I am delighted to present an updated edition of this book.

In the rapidly changing landscape of technology, Go has emerged as a language of choice for building scalable, performant, and maintainable software. Whether you are a seasoned Go developer looking to deepen your expertise or a newcomer eager to master the intricacies of the language, this book is your comprehensive guide.

If you have an older edition of Mastering Go, apart from the first edition, which is now pretty old, do not throw it away just because Mastering Go, Fourth Edition, is out. Go has not changed that much and both the second and third editions can still be useful and relevant. However, Mastering Go, Fourth Edition, is better in many aspects than all previous editions and includes information about the latest Go versions, which you are not going to find in the previous editions of the book.

There exist many exciting topics in this latest edition, including writing RESTful services, writing a statistics application, and working with eBPF, as well as an entirely new chapter on fuzz testing and observability.

I tried to include the right amount of theory and hands-on content—but only you, the reader, can tell if I have succeeded or not. Try to do the exercises located at the end of each chapter and do not hesitate to contact me about ways or ideas to make future editions of this book even better.

Thank you for choosing to pick up Mastering Go, Fourth Edition. Let us dive in and unlock the full potential of Go together. Happy coding!

Who this book is for
This book is for amateur and intermediate Go programmers who want to take their Go knowledge to the next level, as well as developers in other programming languages who want to learn Go.

If this is your first programming book ever, you might have some issues following it and a second reading might be required to fully absorb all the presented knowledge.

Learning by doing is a fundamental principle of studying any programming language. Throughout the book, you will find practical examples and hands-on exercises that illustrate key concepts and encourage you to apply your knowledge to real-world scenarios.

One way or another, prepare to work and learn and fail and then work and learn and fail some more. After all, life is not that different from programming.

What this book covers
Chapter 1, A Quick Introduction to Go, begins by discussing the history of Go, important characteristics of Go, and the advantages of Go, before describing the godoc and go doc utilities and explaining how we can compile and execute Go programs. Then, the chapter discusses about controlling program flow, printing output and getting user input, working with command line arguments, and using log files. In the last part of Chapter 1, we develop a basic version of a statistics application that we are going to keep improving in forthcoming chapters.

Chapter 2, Basic Go Data Types, discusses the basic data types of Go, both numeric and non-numeric; arrays and slices that allow you to group data of the same date; Go pointers; constants; and working with dates and times. The last part of the chapter is about generating random numbers and populating the statistics application with random data.

Chapter 3, Composite Data Types, begins by teaching you about maps, before going into structures and the struct keyword. Additionally, it talks about regular expressions, pattern matching, and working with CSV files. Last, it improves the statistics application by adding data persistency to it.

Chapter 4, Go Generics, is about Generics and how to use the new syntax to write generic functions and define generic data types. This chapter also presents the cmp package, the slices package, and the maps package, which are all implemented using generics to work with as many data types as possible.

Chapter 5, Reflection and Interfaces, is about reflection, interfaces, and type methods, which are functions attached to data types. The chapter also covers the use of the sort.Interface interface for sorting slices, the use of the empty interface, type assertions, type switches, and the error data type. Additionally, we discuss how Go can mimic some object-oriented concepts before improving the statistics application. This chapter also compares generics with interfaces and reflection.

Chapter 6, Go Packages and Functions, is all about packages, modules, and functions, which are the main elements of packages. Among other things, we create a Go package for interacting with a SQLite3 database, create documentation for it, and explain the use of the sometimes-tricky defer keyword. Last, we talk about Workspaces, which is a relatively new Go feature.

Chapter 7, Telling a UNIX System What to Do, is about Systems Programming, which includes subjects such as working with command line arguments, handling UNIX signals, file input and output, the io.Reader and io.Writer interfaces, and the use of the viper and cobra packages. Last, we update the statistics application to use JSON data and convert it into a proper command line utility with the help of the cobra package.

Chapter 8, Go Concurrency, discusses goroutines, channels, and pipelines. We learn about the differences between processes, threads, and goroutines, the sync package, and the way the Go scheduler operates. Additionally, we explore the use of the select keyword and we discuss the various types of Go channels as well as shared memory, mutexes, the sync.Mutex type, and the sync.RWMutex type. The rest of the chapter talks about the context package, the semaphore package, worker pools, how to time out goroutines, and how to detect race conditions.

Chapter 9, Building Web Services, discusses the net/http package, the development of web servers and web services, the creation of web clients, and the timing out of HTTP connections. We also convert the statistics application into a web service and create a command line client for it.

Chapter 10, Working with TCP/IP and WebSocket, is about the net package, TCP/IP, the TCP and UDP protocols, as well as the WebSocket protocol and working with RabbitMQ. We develop lots of practical servers and clients in this chapter.

Chapter 11, Working with REST APIs, is all about working with REST APIs and RESTful services. We learn how to define REST APIs and develop powerful concurrent RESTful servers as well as command line utilities that act as clients to RESTful services.

Chapter 12, Code Testing and Profiling, discusses code testing, code optimization, and code profiling, as well as cross compilation, creating example functions, the use of go:generate, and finding unreachable Go code.

Chapter 13, Fuzz Testing and Observability, talks about fuzz testing, which is a relatively new addition to the Go programming language, and about observability, which refers to the ability to understand, measure, and analyze the internal state and behavior of a system based on its external outputs or observable signals.

Chapter 14, Efficiency and Performance, is about benchmarking Go code, understanding the Go memory model, and eliminating memory leaks. The chapter also includes the development of an eBPF utility—eBPF has become a foundational technology for improving observability, security, and performance in modern Linux systems.

Chapter 15, Changes in Recent Go Versions, is about the language changes, additions, and improvements in the latest Go versions and it will help you understand how Go is evolving over time.

Appendix, The Go Garbage Collector, talks about the operation of the Go Garbage Collector and illustrates how this Go component can affect the performance of your code.

To get the most out of this book
This book requires a modern computer with a relatively recent Go version installed, which includes any machine running Mac OS X, macOS, or Linux, as well as familiarity with your operating system, its filesystem, and git(1). Most of the presented code also runs on Microsoft Windows machines without any changes.

As you embark on your journey to mastering Go, I encourage you to experiment, ask questions, and engage with the material actively. The Go programming language offers a refreshing blend of simplicity and power, and I am confident that this book will provide you with the knowledge and skills needed to become a proficient Go developer.

Download the example code files
The code bundle for the book is hosted on GitHub at https://github.com/mactsouk/mGo4th. We also have other code bundles from our rich catalog of books and videos available at https://github.com/PacktPublishing/. Check them out!

Download the color images
We also provide a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/diagrams used in this book. You can download it here: https://packt.link/gbp/9781805127147.

Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.

CodeInText: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles. For example: “Mount the downloaded WebStorm-10*.dmg disk image file as another disk in your system”.

A block of code is set as follows:

package main
import "fmt"
func doubleSquare(x int) (int, int) {
    return x * 2, x * x
}
When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, the relevant lines or items are set in bold:

fmt.Println("Double of", n, "is", d)
fmt.Println("Square of", n, "is", s)
anF := func(param int) int {
    return param * param
}
Any command line input or output is written as follows:

$ go run namedReturn.go 1 -2
-2 1
-2 1
Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or important information. For instance, words in menus or dialog boxes appear in the text like this. For example: “The wordByWord() function uses regular expressions to separate the words found in each line of the input file”.

Warnings or important notes appear like this.

Tips and tricks appear like this.